# perturb.met
perturb-Met can identify transcriptional perturbations centered at hundreds of metabolites in a genome-scale metabolic network. perturb-Met adapts the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence concept from information theory to quantify relative changes in the distribution of transcript abundances for all genes connected to a metabolite between two conditions (e.g., AD vs. control). KL divergence quantifies how a statistical distribution differs from a second, reference distribution.  

perturb-Met offers several advantages over existing methods. First, the commonly used pathway-level enrichment analysis groups metabolic genes into distinct pathways, which does not account for the fact that metabolites often span and connect multiple pathways. Moreover, pathway-level analysis often lacks sufficient resolution: transcriptional changes may be concentrated in only a few metabolite hotspots and involve a small number of key enzymes within a pathway. perturb-Met addresses both problems by considering relative changes of transcript abundances at individual metabolites. Further, compared to Reporter Metabolite analysis can also identify transcriptional dysregulation around metabolites, and thus has higher resolution than pathway-based approaches, it still relies on univariate differential expression analysis for each gene separately. This suffers from two potential problems. First, because it asks the question, Is there more extensive differential expression than expected by chance?, it requires a minimum and a maximum number of genes connected to a metabolite (e.g., minimum 3 genes, maximum 50 genes), which may miss important metabolites connected by only two genes. Second, even if more than 3 genes were connected to a metabolite, Reporter Metabolite analysis would still require enough of them to be significantly differentially expressed. A metabolite may not be selected if only one of its connected genes is differentially expressed. However, using  perturb-Met, it is still considered noteworthy if the magnitude of expression change for one gene significantly alters the relative distribution of transcript abundances of all genes around a metabolite.   
